README.md, before:

# eShop Reference Application - "AdventureWorks"

A reference .NET application implementing an e-commerce website using a services-based architecture using [.NET Aspire](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/aspire/).

![eShop Reference Application architecture diagram](img/eshop_architecture.png)

![eShop homepage screenshot](img/eshop_homepage.png)

## Getting Started

This version of eShop is based on .NET 9. 

Previous eShop versions:
* [.NET 8](https://github.com/dotnet/eShop/tree/release/8.0)

### Prerequisites

- Clone the eShop repository: https://github.com/dotnet/eshop
- [Install & start Docker Desktop](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/)

#### Windows with Visual Studio
- Install [Visual Studio 2022 version 17.10 or newer](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/vs/).
  - Select the following workloads:
    - `ASP.NET and web development` workload.
    - `.NET Aspire SDK` component in `Individual components`.
    - Optional: `.NET Multi-platform App UI development` to run client apps

Or

- Run the following commands in a Powershell & Terminal running as `Administrator` to automatically configure your environment with the required tools to build and run this application. (Note: A restart is required and included in the script below.)

```powershell
install-Module -Name Microsoft.WinGet.Configuration -AllowPrerelease -AcceptLicense -Force
$env:Path = [System.Environment]::GetEnvironmentVariable("Path","Machine") + ";" + [System.Environment]::GetEnvironmentVariable("Path","User")
get-WinGetConfiguration -file .\.configurations\vside.dsc.yaml | Invoke-WinGetConfiguration -AcceptConfigurationAgreements
```

Or

- From Dev Home go to `Machine Configuration -> Clone repositories`. Enter the URL for this repository. In the confirmation screen look for the section `Configuration File Detected` and click `Run File`.

#### Mac, Linux, & Windows without Visual Studio
- Install the latest [.NET 9 SDK](https://dot.net/download?cid=eshop)

Or

- Run the following commands in a Powershell & Terminal running as `Administrator` to automatically configuration your environment with the required tools to build and run this application. (Note: A restart is required after running the script below.)

##### Install Visual Studio Code and related extensions
```powershell
install-Module -Name Microsoft.WinGet.Configuration -AllowPrerelease -AcceptLicense  -Force
$env:Path = [System.Environment]::GetEnvironmentVariable("Path","Machine") + ";" + [System.Environment]::GetEnvironmentVariable("Path","User")
get-WinGetConfiguration -file .\.configurations\vscode.dsc.yaml | Invoke-WinGetConfiguration -AcceptConfigurationAgreements
```

> Note: These commands may require `sudo`

- Optional: Install [Visual Studio Code with C# Dev Kit](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/csharp/get-started)
- Optional: Install [.NET MAUI Workload](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/maui/get-started/installation?tabs=visual-studio-code)

> Note: When running on Mac with Apple Silicon (M series processor), Rosetta 2 for grpc-tools. 

### Running the solution

> [!WARNING]
> Remember to ensure that Docker is started

* (Windows only) Run the application from Visual Studio:
 - Open the `eShop.Web.slnf` file in Visual Studio
 - Ensure that `eShop.AppHost.csproj` is your startup project
 - Hit Ctrl-F5 to launch Aspire

* Or run the application from your terminal:
```powershell
dotnet run --project src/eShop.AppHost/eShop.AppHost.csproj
```
then look for lines like this in the console output in order to find the URL to open the Aspire dashboard:
```sh
Login to the dashboard at: http://localhost:19888/login?t=uniquelogincodeforyou
```

> You may need to install ASP.NET Core HTTPS development certificates first, and then close all browser tabs. Learn more at https://aka.ms/aspnet/https-trust-dev-cert

### Azure Open AI

When using Azure OpenAI, inside *eShop.AppHost/appsettings.json*, add the following section:

```json
  "ConnectionStrings": {
    "OpenAi": "Endpoint=xxx;Key=xxx;"
  }
```

Replace the values with your own. Then, in the eShop.AppHost *Program.cs*, set this value to **true**

```csharp
bool useOpenAI = false;
```

Here's additional guidance on the [.NET Aspire OpenAI component](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/aspire/azureai/azureai-openai-component?tabs=dotnet-cli). 

### Use Azure Developer CLI

You can use the [Azure Developer CLI](https://aka.ms/azd) to run this project on Azure with only a few commands. Follow the next instructions:

- Install the latest or update to the latest [Azure Developer CLI (azd)](https://aka.ms/azure-dev/install).
- Log in `azd` (if you haven't done it before) to your Azure account:
```sh
azd auth login
```
- Initialize `azd` from the root of the repo.
```sh
azd init
```
- During init:
  - Select `Use code in the current directory`. Azd will automatically detect the .NET Aspire project.
  - Confirm `.NET (Aspire)` and continue.
  - Select which services to expose to the Internet (exposing `webapp` is enough to test the sample).
  - Finalize the initialization by giving a name to your environment.

- Create Azure resources and deploy the sample by running:
```sh
azd up
```
Notes:
  - The operation takes a few minutes the first time it is ever run for an environment.
  - At the end of the process, `azd` will display the `url` for the webapp. Follow that link to test the sample.
  - You can run `azd up` after saving changes to the sample to re-deploy and update the sample.
  - Report any issues to [azure-dev](https://github.com/Azure/azure-dev/issues) repo.
  - [FAQ and troubleshoot](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/developer/azure-developer-cli/troubleshoot?tabs=Browser) for azd.

## Contributing

For more information on contributing to this repo, read [the contribution documentation](./CONTRIBUTING.md) and [the Code of Conduct](CODE-OF-CONDUCT.md).

### Sample data

The sample catalog data is defined in [catalog.json](https://github.com/dotnet/eShop/blob/main/src/Catalog.API/Setup/catalog.json). Those product names, descriptions, and brand names are fictional and were generated using [GPT-35-Turbo](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/ai-services/openai/how-to/chatgpt), and the corresponding [product images](https://github.com/dotnet/eShop/tree/main/src/Catalog.API/Pics) were generated using [DALL·E 3](https://openai.com/dall-e-3).

## eShop on Azure

For a version of this app configured for deployment on Azure, please view [the eShop on Azure](https://github.com/Azure-Samples/eShopOnAzure) repo.

Commit message:

Add document for enhanced observability of the project

README.md, after:

# Enhancing Observability of eShop project

The extension will be focused on improving application’ observ-
ability using OpenTelemetry (OTel) and other tools. In order to make a system observable it must be
instrumented first, meaning the application should create and emit (export) its traces, metrics and logs.
Then a backend can listen to this data (a.k.a telemetry) then structure, store, visualize and more. The
eShop project already has a decent level of observability because it’s already well integrated with OTel, and
using the Aspire that acts as the observability backend, it collects and visualize the telemetry data however it
should be noted that Aspire doesn’t persist this data by default. Aspire is able to collect OTel data because
it has an OTel Collector embedded inside.

## Read the document
[Enhancing Observability of eShop project](https://github.com/user-attachments/files/19476437/AS_P1.pdf)

## Overall diagram
![Overall diagram](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/dfe1fbbf-276f-4df4-9916-c80d50159d5f)




# eShop Reference Application - "AdventureWorks"

A reference .NET application implementing an e-commerce website using a services-based architecture using [.NET Aspire](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/aspire/).

![eShop Reference Application architecture diagram](img/eshop_architecture.png)

![eShop homepage screenshot](img/eshop_homepage.png)

## Getting Started

This version of eShop is based on .NET 9. 

Previous eShop versions:
* [.NET 8](https://github.com/dotnet/eShop/tree/release/8.0)

### Prerequisites

- Clone the eShop repository: https://github.com/dotnet/eshop
- [Install & start Docker Desktop](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/)

#### Windows with Visual Studio
- Install [Visual Studio 2022 version 17.10 or newer](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/vs/).
  - Select the following workloads:
    - `ASP.NET and web development` workload.
    - `.NET Aspire SDK` component in `Individual components`.
    - Optional: `.NET Multi-platform App UI development` to run client apps

Or

- Run the following commands in a Powershell & Terminal running as `Administrator` to automatically configure your environment with the required tools to build and run this application. (Note: A restart is required and included in the script below.)

```powershell
install-Module -Name Microsoft.WinGet.Configuration -AllowPrerelease -AcceptLicense -Force
$env:Path = [System.Environment]::GetEnvironmentVariable("Path","Machine") + ";" + [System.Environment]::GetEnvironmentVariable("Path","User")
get-WinGetConfiguration -file .\.configurations\vside.dsc.yaml | Invoke-WinGetConfiguration -AcceptConfigurationAgreements
```

Or

- From Dev Home go to `Machine Configuration -> Clone repositories`. Enter the URL for this repository. In the confirmation screen look for the section `Configuration File Detected` and click `Run File`.

#### Mac, Linux, & Windows without Visual Studio
- Install the latest [.NET 9 SDK](https://dot.net/download?cid=eshop)

Or

- Run the following commands in a Powershell & Terminal running as `Administrator` to automatically configuration your environment with the required tools to build and run this application. (Note: A restart is required after running the script below.)

##### Install Visual Studio Code and related extensions
```powershell
install-Module -Name Microsoft.WinGet.Configuration -AllowPrerelease -AcceptLicense  -Force
$env:Path = [System.Environment]::GetEnvironmentVariable("Path","Machine") + ";" + [System.Environment]::GetEnvironmentVariable("Path","User")
get-WinGetConfiguration -file .\.configurations\vscode.dsc.yaml | Invoke-WinGetConfiguration -AcceptConfigurationAgreements
```

> Note: These commands may require `sudo`

- Optional: Install [Visual Studio Code with C# Dev Kit](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/csharp/get-started)
- Optional: Install [.NET MAUI Workload](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/maui/get-started/installation?tabs=visual-studio-code)

> Note: When running on Mac with Apple Silicon (M series processor), Rosetta 2 for grpc-tools. 

### Running the solution

> [!WARNING]
> Remember to ensure that Docker is started

* (Windows only) Run the application from Visual Studio:
 - Open the `eShop.Web.slnf` file in Visual Studio
 - Ensure that `eShop.AppHost.csproj` is your startup project
 - Hit Ctrl-F5 to launch Aspire

* Or run the application from your terminal:
```powershell
dotnet run --project src/eShop.AppHost/eShop.AppHost.csproj
```
then look for lines like this in the console output in order to find the URL to open the Aspire dashboard:
```sh
Login to the dashboard at: http://localhost:19888/login?t=uniquelogincodeforyou
```

> You may need to install ASP.NET Core HTTPS development certificates first, and then close all browser tabs. Learn more at https://aka.ms/aspnet/https-trust-dev-cert

### Azure Open AI

When using Azure OpenAI, inside *eShop.AppHost/appsettings.json*, add the following section:

```json
  "ConnectionStrings": {
    "OpenAi": "Endpoint=xxx;Key=xxx;"
  }
```

Replace the values with your own. Then, in the eShop.AppHost *Program.cs*, set this value to **true**

```csharp
bool useOpenAI = false;
```

Here's additional guidance on the [.NET Aspire OpenAI component](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/aspire/azureai/azureai-openai-component?tabs=dotnet-cli). 

### Use Azure Developer CLI

You can use the [Azure Developer CLI](https://aka.ms/azd) to run this project on Azure with only a few commands. Follow the next instructions:

- Install the latest or update to the latest [Azure Developer CLI (azd)](https://aka.ms/azure-dev/install).
- Log in `azd` (if you haven't done it before) to your Azure account:
```sh
azd auth login
```
- Initialize `azd` from the root of the repo.
```sh
azd init
```
- During init:
  - Select `Use code in the current directory`. Azd will automatically detect the .NET Aspire project.
  - Confirm `.NET (Aspire)` and continue.
  - Select which services to expose to the Internet (exposing `webapp` is enough to test the sample).
  - Finalize the initialization by giving a name to your environment.

- Create Azure resources and deploy the sample by running:
```sh
azd up
```
Notes:
  - The operation takes a few minutes the first time it is ever run for an environment.
  - At the end of the process, `azd` will display the `url` for the webapp. Follow that link to test the sample.
  - You can run `azd up` after saving changes to the sample to re-deploy and update the sample.
  - Report any issues to [azure-dev](https://github.com/Azure/azure-dev/issues) repo.
  - [FAQ and troubleshoot](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/developer/azure-developer-cli/troubleshoot?tabs=Browser) for azd.

## Contributing

For more information on contributing to this repo, read [the contribution documentation](./CONTRIBUTING.md) and [the Code of Conduct](CODE-OF-CONDUCT.md).

### Sample data

The sample catalog data is defined in [catalog.json](https://github.com/dotnet/eShop/blob/main/src/Catalog.API/Setup/catalog.json). Those product names, descriptions, and brand names are fictional and were generated using [GPT-35-Turbo](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/ai-services/openai/how-to/chatgpt), and the corresponding [product images](https://github.com/dotnet/eShop/tree/main/src/Catalog.API/Pics) were generated using [DALL·E 3](https://openai.com/dall-e-3).

## eShop on Azure

For a version of this app configured for deployment on Azure, please view [the eShop on Azure](https://github.com/Azure-Samples/eShopOnAzure) repo.
